---
layout: default
title: Tutorial 3 - Species delimitation
parent: Tutorials
nav_order: 3
---

# Tutorial 3: Testing species delimitation hypotheses
{: .no_toc }

Finally, if the question of interest pertains to the delimitation of putative species that are specified in the dataset, then for a given hypothesized tree, you will want to compare the fit of a "full tree" model for which all coalescence times are estimated (i.e., are non-zero) to "collapsed" models for which one or more coalescence times are set to be zero. To do this, rather than adding additional models to a `migrationArray`, these collapsed models should be specified when running a `GridSearch`. Thus, for a given set of models in a `migrationArray` that specify fully resolved trees, the collapsing of specific nodes can be specified using `GridSearch`s `setCollapseZero` argument. This argument inputs a vector that defines which coalescence time parameters in a model one would like to be set to zero. So, for our toy dataset, setting `setCollapseZero = 1` when fitting an ((A,B),C) isolation-only model will effectively collapse populations A and B into a single population; setting `setCollapseZero = 1:2` will simulate a single panmictic population.

Below is an example for how to test the existance of 1, 2, or 3 species using the first three models run above using the toy dataset. I have increased the number of nTrees to 10000 such there are enough simulated trees to calculate the log-likelihood for all the models. These runs will take a few minutes.

### **<font color='#ff7700'>This tutorial assumes you have read the paper that describes this method and you are familiar with how to use <font color='#006579'>PHRAPL</font> functions, especially with how to design and edit models.</font>**
{: .no_toc }
- Jackson N, Carstens BC, Morales AE, O’Meara BC (2017) [Species delimitation with gene flow](https://academic.oup.com/sysbio/article/66/5/799/2726792?searchresult=1). Systematic Biology. 66:799-812.

---
1. TOC
{:toc}
---

## Prepare data
First, set relevant parameters:

```
modelRange<-1:3  
nTrees<-10000  
```

## GridSearch

### Three species models
Then run and save analyses for three species models:

```
result<-GridSearch(migrationArray=migrationArray,modelRange=modelRange,
    popAssignments=popAssignments,observedTrees=observedTrees,
    subsampleWeights.df=subsampleWeights.df,subsamplesPerGene=subsamplesPerGene,
    nTrees=nTrees) 
save(list="result",file="phraplOutput_models1-3_3species.rda")  
```
### Two species models
Run and save analyses for two species models:

```
result<-GridSearch(migrationArray=migrationArray,modelRange=modelRange,
    popAssignments=popAssignments,observedTrees=observedTrees,
    subsampleWeights.df=subsampleWeights.df,subsamplesPerGene=subsamplesPerGene,
    nTrees=nTrees,setCollapseZero=1) 
save(list="result",file="phraplOutput_models1-3_2species.rda") 
```

### Single species models
And then run and save analyses for single species models:

```
result<-GridSearch(migrationArray=migrationArray,modelRange=modelRange,
    popAssignments=popAssignments,observedTrees=observedTrees,
    subsampleWeights.df=subsampleWeights.df,subsamplesPerGene=subsamplesPerGene,
    nTrees=nTrees,setCollapseZero=1:2) 
save(list="result",file="phraplOutput_models1-3_1species.rda") 
```

## Post-processing

### Concatenate results:


```
totalResults<-ConcatenateResults(migrationArray=migrationArray)  
```
### Model averages

And model average parameters

```
modelAverages<-CalculateModelAverages(totalResults)  
```

## Calculate genealogical divergence index (_gdi_)
Finally, you can calculate the genealogical divergence index (gdi) between populations A and B using the model averaged parameter values of migration rate and divergence time. This index is a composite metric that estimates overall divergence (between 0 and 1) from the combined effects of genetic drift and gene flow (0 = panmixia; 1 = strong divergence).

```
gdi<-CalculateGdi(modelAverages$t1_1.2,modelAverages$m1_1.2)
```
